[THEME MUSIC]
>>REGINA MEREDITH: We're going
to start this story in 1945
with the discovery of
the Nag Hammadi texts.
Two Egyptian peasant brothers
found the texts outside a cave
and brought them home, where
mom burned some of them
to heat the hut they lived in.
Peter Canova is
here with us today
to talk about the ramifications
of millennia of wisdom going
up in smoke and so much more.
Welcome, Peter.
>>PETER CANOVA: Nice to be here.
>>REGINA: First of all,
what was the significance
of these scrolls?
And I love the story that
you relay about the mother
and what happened with
these scrolls and why.
These things have happened
throughout history.
And you're thinking, oh, my god.
>>CANOVA: Yeah.
It had a lot of Indiana
Jones-type elements to it.
>>REGINA: Tell us a
little bit about it.
Because people don't know that
part of the story, normally.
>>CANOVA: Well, in 1945,
some Egyptian brothers
were poking around caves
in the lower mountains
outside of a town called
Nag Hammadi in Egypt.
And they went into the caves.
And there were some
earthenware jars in there.
And they debated whether
to break them open,
because they were
afraid there might
be an evil jinn in there--
genie, as they call it.
A jinn in Islamic terms.
But their greed overcame their
fear because they said, well,
then again, it could be gold.
So they broke it open.
And all these papyrus
scrolls fall out.
And at first, they said, well,
this has to do with Christians.
This has nothing to do with us.
Let's just leave it alone.
But then they said,
well, we don't know.
Maybe it might be
worth something.
So they took them back home.
And yes, as you said, mom, not
realizing the value of these,
used some of them for burning--
>>REGINA: For fuel.
>>CANOVA: --the furnace for fuel
for cooking and so forth and so
on.
So unfortunately, we lost
some great text there.
But I think the
significance of it
is that these texts gave us
the insight, a window, back
into the old Gnostic masters.
Now, the Gnostics, that
comes from a Greek word
"gnosis," which means "to know."
And the Gnostics were a
group of mystics that were
centered in Alexandria, Egypt.
And they were really, I
guess I could say, probably,
the most scientific
seers of their day,
as I think we'll get into
a little bit later on.
But prior to this
time, we had no voice
of the Gnostic masters, except
through their enemies, which
were the early church fathers.
So we really only knew very
much about the Gnostics
through the writings
of the church fathers.
And, of course, those were,
rather, hostile point of view.
But now we were able
to hear directly
from these old Gnostic masters.
And it opened up a
whole new perspective
on early Christianity
and the nature
of the mystical
Christian church,
the mystical foundations
of the Christian church.
>>REGINA: So is it
accurate that it's
believed that these
texts were written
around the fourth
and fifth century
by a sect of Christian monks
who were of a mystical nature?
>>CANOVA: Probably
not Christian monks.
It was probably hidden
by Christian monks.
>>REGINA: Hidden
>>CANOVA: But the
writings of the Gnostics,
they vary over time.
Part of the knock that the
Christian church has leveled
against the Gnostics
is, well, their texts
came after the writings
of Paul and so forth.
Well, that's not really true
because the Gospel of Thomas,
which is clearly Gnostic,
seemed to be dated just
about the time of the
writings of Paul, about 50
AD, and yes, the other writings,
although the ones that we have
appear to have been written
around 100 AD or there.
We don't know if those were
copies of earlier texts.
So in other words, there may be
earlier Gnostic texts out there
that were originals
that we're not aware of,
and we just got copies.
But yeah, primarily in the
first century after Christ.
>>REGINA: So it
would seem, then,
that because they were talking
about the foundational level
of the nature of reality, that
this must have been inherited
and passed-down knowledge
from even Atlantean
or ancient Egyptian times.
What is your
understanding of that?
>>CANOVA: Well,
the Gnostics were
very unique because Alexandria
was the intellectual capital
of the world at that time,
far more so than Rome
or even Athens.
And you had the confluences
of so many ancient traditions.
The Hindus, Persian
Zoroastrians,
the Jewish Kabbalah, Egyptian
Hermeticists, and even
Hellenistic Greek
philosophy was all part
of the intellectual mainstream
of Alexandria at that time.
And the Gnostics really were
the people who synthesized those
into a coherent understanding.
But I would also say this
to be really accurate--
there was a universal spiritual
tradition in ancient times.
We call it the Perennial
Philosophy today.
And it had common
elements to it in, really,
throughout the ancient world.
Of course, over
the centuries, it
would have been differentiated
in different cultures
and things like that.
But it talked about everything
stemming-- all appearances
stemming from one source.
And it described
the nature of light
and how light
operates and so forth.
And there were actually what
they called the mystery schools
back in those days.
And you can think of
the mystery schools
as an Ivy League of mystical
traditional schools that
stretched all the
way from India, even
to the British Isles.
And they all would have
had variances, as I said,
in their teachings.
But they trained adepts
in the mystical arts
and in the methodology
of contacting
higher spirit, higher
consciousness, higher
sources of information.
So that was the foundation
that the Gnostics built on.
They didn't just
invent all of it.
They inherited much of it.
But they collated it and put
it into a very coherent system
of understanding.
>>REGINA: That's
what it would seem.
And talk about up in
smoke, Alexandria.
>>CANOVA: Yeah, unfortunately,
twice actually, the library
burned.
And then the serapeum, which
was a smaller library, burnt.
And the knowledge that we
lost is just unfathomable.
>>REGINA: By design, I
assume, do you think?
>>CANOVA: It's hard to say.
>>REGINA: I mean,
it's speculation.
>>CANOVA: Yeah,
it's hard to say.
I mean, you can--
I do think that there's a
principle of opposition that
exists in this world.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>CANOVA: And that great
light attracts great darkness.
And that, perhaps, circumstances
like that are manifestations.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
Anyway, so gone.
So here we are now.
It takes a couple
thousand years.
It'll all come
back around people.
So a lot of the same players
are back around again.
So let's talk about
the creation story.
And let's go into it as
told in the "Pistis Sophia"
and why is this
particular body of work
so important in your mind.
>>CANOVA: Well, first
of all, it lays out
what I believe was the
foundation of quantum physics
3,000 years before
quantum physics.
It's so rich in symbolism
and so important
for understanding the
nature of this world,
the origin of human beings,
and how reality operates.
It encompasses all those things.
So it's very deep.
And I need to take a
little bit of time.
>>REGINA: Oh, yeah.
Well, I'm going to ask you--
I'm going to prompt you
through because it is so rich.
There's so much to it.
So I thought-- I just
took it in the flow
that I found interesting.
>>CANOVA: Sure.
>>REGINA: And so
we'll go on a journey
together and interject
anything you want.
>>CANOVA: Sure.
What I would tell our
listening audience
is, close your eyes
while I'm telling this.
Because it will
help you visualize
things that are a little
abstract and sometimes
hard to grasp.
So if you just picture a field
of energy that extends out
into infinity, and picture
it as a whitish bubble
or something with color in
it that extends over a field,
it radiates out, this energy
was the mind of the source.
This was the source
projecting its energy outward.
And within this
vast energy field,
there are pockets
or compartments.
And those pockets
or compartments
are distinct realities,
localized realities
of which ours, physical
reality, is one of them.
And the Sophia story basically
starts off by the one source
projecting its thought out to
form other spiritual entities
or spiritual beings.
Now, you can say,
well, it might be
similar to angels in Christian
terminology, but not exactly.
What these beings were
were archetypal energies
of the one source itself.
They represented aspects.
And incidentally, I
call it the source.
But you can call it God.
You can call it the source--
>>REGINA: The creator.
>>CANOVA: --the creator.
You can call it
anything you want.
It's all the same thing.
The terminology doesn't matter.
>>REGINA: The point is there
was some presence with minds
so vast it had the
potential to create.
>>CANOVA: Exactly.
And it had the desire
to expand itself
throughout different
experiences of creation.
And that was the whole
purpose of it generating
other points of consciousness.
Because think about
it for a second.
If you're everything, it's
a rather static existence.
You can exist.
But you can't really experience.
You only experience through
contrasts with other beings,
with other things.
That's how you
reflect upon yourself,
is by the contrast around you.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
So when you're talking about
these beings, these archetypes
that were created, the way
you explain it in the book,
it's almost as
though what we would
call the noble
attributes, you could say,
of compassion,
beauty, truth, grace.
These concepts became
archetypal entities.
That's about that.
>>CANOVA: That's exactly it.
These spiritual entities,
which were really
sources of intelligent
energy in and of themselves,
were aspects of the
deity, aspects of God,
aspects of the source.
They were given names like
truth, justice, beauty, wisdom,
all these beautiful
attributes, which
are archetypal images
that even extend down
into our level of existence.
These are archetypes
that have guided humanity
through art and poetry--
>>REGINA: The
Noble Truths, yeah.
>>CANOVA: --and the Noble
Truths throughout the ages.
So the process by which
these beings were generated
is important to understand
because it was actually
a process of limitation.
When I told you that
the source projected out
this vast field of energy,
which they call the quantum
fields in modern
terminology, there
are parallel dimensions
or parallel universes
within that field.
As I told you, there's
compartments within that field.
Now, those compartments
are not really spatial.
People like to think
in terms of space.
But what they really were were
frequencies of vibrations.
>>REGINA: Frequencies, yes.
>>CANOVA: Differing frequencies
created different dimensions
of existence.
>>REGINA: Like the
multiverse is--
>>CANOVA: The multiverse.
>>REGINA: --the collection
of these frequencies.
>>CANOVA: Exactly.
And these spiritual beings,
which were called aeons,
A-E-O-N-S, which means
eternities in Greek,
and they represented the forces
that helped shape the creation
in the way that the
creator wanted to do it.
They were working in harmony or
with the will of the creator.
But they had a sense
of self-identity.
They realized they
were themselves.
But they realized they
were part of the source.
Now--
>>REGINA: But let me
just say something.
At this point, this was
almost pure thought-form--
>>CANOVA: Yes.
>>REGINA: --existence?
OK.
There was no material
reality at this time.
And that's where we're
going to go in a little bit.
>>CANOVA: That's correct.
>>REGINA: OK.
Now, we have these archetypes.
And as in all things,
learning through contrast,
then did this creative force
create their mirror reflection
in the negative?
>>CANOVA: Well, that-- you
have to go a little bit further
into the story to get
to that part of it.
And we were talking
about Sophia.
And here--
>>REGINA: Yeah, we're going
to spend a lot of time on her.
>>CANOVA: Yeah.
And here's where Sophia
comes into the story.
>>REGINA: I call her God's girl.
[LAUGHS]
>>CANOVA: The youngest of
these aeons that were created
was Sophia, whose
name means wisdom.
And incidentally, the
only reason most people
aren't familiar with
Sophia-- because she
is a character in the
Bible, particularly
in the Old Testament.
But she's called wisdom, and--
instead of Sophia.
Sophia is the Greek
word for wisdom.
The English translations that
we got use the term wisdom.
And she is a very prominent
figure in the Book of Job.
And in Proverbs, she says, "I
was there from the beginning.
I was there with the creator
at the beginning," meaning
she was one of the eternities.
So each of these
eternities had--
it was a little bit of
a hierarchy in a sense.
Because we talked
about limitation.
And the way you
experience individuality
is through limitation.
What made any of these aeons or
spiritual beings differentiated
from one another was their
level of spiritual vibration.
So it worked its way on down.
So the closer you
were to the source,
the higher the vibration was.
The more--
>>REGINA: So truth and beauty
were above, it turns out,
wisdom?
>>CANOVA: Yes.
And when you worked
your way down,
there was a little
bit of dilution.
Now, still very high spiritual
being, very godlike high
spiritual beings, but there
was a differentiation in terms
of the spiritual vibration.
What I liken it to
is you have a CD.
And then you make a copy of
that CD and a copy of that copy
and a copy of that copy.
Well, the original has the
greatest clarity and fidelity.
The subsequent copies are
all a little bit diluted.
They're very close,
very similar,
but they're a
little bit diluted.
So Sophia was the last of these
aeons or these spiritual beings
to be created.
And she was wisdom.
So how does wisdom grow?
Well, it only grows
through experience.
So Sophia had this desire
to create on her own,
to create the way
the creator did.
Because none of the
aeons really understood
the deeper mysteries
of the creator.
And she longed to know
these deeper mysteries.
So Sophia looks outside of this
original sphere of creation,
which would be the source and
these aeons or these entities.
She looks outside of
that sphere of creation.
And she looks into something
called chaos, again,
another quantum term.
We have chaos theory
in quantum physics.
But what chaos
really represented
was the unorganized part
of this spiritual field
that had not been organized
by the mind of God.
>>REGINA: And in Hermetics, it
would be called prima materia?
>>CANOVA: Right.
That would be
another name for it.
>>REGINA: Another name for it.
And if you go to the
Egyptian lexicon,
you could almost
say what she was
doing was a function of
what would be known as ISIS.
>>CANOVA: Mm-hmm.
>>REGINA: So let's
talk about that now.
So this is really important.
She wants to have experience to
be able to expand her wisdom.
She is now reaching into
the already existing field
of chaos, prima materia,
quantum soup, whatever, chaos.
She's reaching into it to
put an imprint upon it,
which is creation, just like--
right?
>>CANOVA: Yes.
And what happens is
something very interesting.
She projects her high energy,
her divine essence into chaos.
And something very
weird happens there.
Chaos is not an empty vacuum.
And science has found--
quantum physics has found there
is no such thing as a vacuum.
In space, all around us,
it's seething with virtual
particles, particles
that have-- in potential,
that have not yet--
>>REGINA: Waiting
to be imprinted.
>>CANOVA: --that have
not yet come into--
manifested into what
we would call reality.
So chaos is seething
with protomatter.
Now, this blows my mind
that they could even give it
a term like this--
"protomatter," that
which becomes before matter,
which is virtual particles.
Chaos is seething with
these virtual particles.
And they swarm around
Sofia like iron filings
would swarm to a magnet.
And they engulf her.
They start to activate
with her high energy.
But they're draining
her energy off.
And something is-- new
is starting to form here.
She cries out to heaven,
I am becoming as lead.
Save me from this matter
that I am becoming.
My light is diminishing.
Save me from this matter.
What we see here is the whole
functioning of the God particle
in quantum physics.
Now, the God particle--
there's something that surrounds
our universe called the Higgs
field, all
encompassing-- and there
are virtual particles
in the Higgs field
they call Higgs bosons.
Now, they discovered
the Higgs bosons in 2012
in the giant particle
collider in Switzerland,
underneath Switzerland
and France.
And they-- it was theorized
for like 50 years.
But they finally found
out it was a reality.
And what the Higgs
bosons do is that when
energy enters into our
universe-- and incidentally,
science has no idea
what energy is.
They don't know
where it comes from.
They can manipulate it
to a certain extent.
But they don't know its origins.
And they don't really
understand what energy is.
So energy comes into our
universe from somewhere.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
>>CANOVA: And the Higgs
bosons attach themselves
to these high streams of
energy and slow them down.
And they slow them
to the point where
they start to take on mass,
because that's what matter is.
Matter is simply energy in
a lower state of vibration.
So they lower the vibration
of this high energy.
And it starts to
form mass or matter--
what was happening
in the Sophia story.
They swarmed around Sophia.
They lowered her high energy.
And she cries out,
I'm becoming matter.
So here, you see the function.
I mean, it's so clear that you
see the function of the God
particle and the energy-matter
conversion happening
in this story right there.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
And that does seem very clear.
There is a point in this story,
though, that is interesting.
Because, as you say in this,
she was, supposedly, only half
of the wisdom equation.
You say she had a counterpart.
Is that correct?
Or was she standing
on her own as wisdom?
>>CANOVA: She acted on her own.
But she was part of a pairing.
>>REGINA: Well, now
let's talk about that.
And did the others
have pairings?
>>CANOVA: Yes, there was--
OK, this really gets back into
something very fundamental
in understanding the
whole process of creation,
which is that although
everything stems from one
source, that one source-- the
characteristics of that one
source was--
divided itself into
a polarity that we
call yin-yang, male and female.
And it was the interaction
of that polarity,
that positive and negative,
the interaction between them
that generated the light, heat,
and energy to fundamentally
spur on creation.
So because these spiritual
beings, the aeons,
were made in the
image of their father,
they too were polarities.
They had a male and
a female counterpart.
So Sophia had a
male counterpart.
It was given different
names in different texts.
>>REGINA: Yeah, I'd
be curious to know.
>>CANOVA: One of them was
called Thelema or will, OK?
>>REGINA: OK.
>>CANOVA: So wisdom and
will were a pairing.
There were other ones.
But I won't digress into that.
But she acted--
Sophia, the thing
that she did that
was radical and represented
the first fall of spirit,
the first break from heaven--
from the heavenly
realm was that she
created without the consent
of her counterpart--
her male counterpart and without
the consent of the creator.
So those were the
two preconditions
for how creation happened
within the divine realm.
It would be an agreement
between the male and the female
essentially blessed or
okayed by the "big guy."
But Sophia didn't
have any of that.
She acted completely on her own.
And therefore, many
of the texts say
that she was very imprudent,
and she committed a great sin.
>>REGINA: We're going
to debate that later.
>>CANOVA: That could be debated.
That could be debated.
There's two sides of that
coin that we can look at.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
>>CANOVA: But getting back
to the Sophia story, so all
of a sudden, this new dimension
of matter was happening.
Now, I want to caution you
that this is not matter
as we know it.
These were finer, more like
forms of matter, but forms
of matter nonetheless.
>>REGINA: It was
a field that could
be expressed once it had
instruction or imprint or logos
applied to it.
>>CANOVA: Yeah, and there's
all degrees of matter.
There's finer degrees.
And there's denser degrees.
We would be pretty dense.
There's finer degrees
of matter that we--
>>REGINA: And other dimensions.
>>CANOVA: --wouldn't
be able to detect.
So this new dimension of
matter could no longer
coexist with the
spiritual dimension--
the high-energy, the
spiritual dimension.
They were two different states.
They could not coexist.
So the texts say that this new
dimension was projected apart
in a violent upheaval
and exploded out
into another dimension.
Well, what is that describing?
>>REGINA: Well--
>>CANOVA: The Big Bang.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>CANOVA: Yeah.
So here, we've already seen
the Gnostic texts describing
the existence of
parallel dimensions,
the energy-matter conversion
of the God particle,
the origin of matter,
and the Big Bang.
And the Big Bang, essentially,
was the appearance
of something out of nothing, the
appearance of our universe out
of seemingly nothing.
>>REGINA: It doesn't mean it
was literally a solo explosion.
It just came out of nothing.
>>CANOVA: It came out of
nothing from our standpoint.
>>REGINA: That's right.
>>CANOVA: From our standpoint.
>>REGINA: From our standpoint.
>>CANOVA: Because
we're looking at it--
>>REGINA: Exactly.
>>CANOVA: --from this
side of the equation.
The other side of
the equation, it
would be something
quite different.
>>REGINA: The other
side of the horizon.
>>CANOVA: Yeah.
So right there, you
see descriptions
of some of the major theories
of modern quantum physics.
And also, I should
mention the quantum field,
the virtual particles.
All these things were
described in the Gnostic texts.
Of course, they didn't always
use the exact same terminology.
We didn't have particle
colliders back in those days.
We didn't have the technical
capabilities in those days
to describe them.
But it's about as
close as you can
get to a description of these--
>>REGINA: Just because
we didn't have machinery
to prove it didn't mean
they didn't already
know and understand it.
>>CANOVA: Or have their
ways to describe it.
>>REGINA: And have their ways
of describing it, exactly.
>>CANOVA: Exactly.
>>REGINA: So now
we have creation.
At this point, is
that where you would
say some of the mere
reflections of the Noble Truths
started coming into
play, the game of light
and dark and polarity in terms
of the creation of entities
that later became influential
in the cosmos and on our planet?
>>CANOVA: Well, when you
talk about light and dark,
you have to understand
that opposition
existed from the beginning.
And the reason
for opposition was
that in order for
these created beings
to be individuals that have free
will, they had to have choice.
So opposition is what
gave them the choice.
And the choice was, at least
as far as Sofia is concerned,
you either subordinate
your will to God's will,
or you pursue your
own individuality.
When Sofia fell from heaven,
this was the first fall.
In the Gnostic tradition,
there's more than one fall.
The first fall was
Sofia's fall from heaven.
And what it created was also
the dimension of soul-mind.
Now, there's a difference
between soul and spirit.
Most people use those
interchangeably.
>>REGINA: Let's talk about that.
>>CANOVA: OK.
The difference-- spirit is
that consciousness that never
left the sphere of the source.
Its will is the
will of the source.
They are individuals.
But they recognize
themselves as themselves.
And they recognize
themselves as the source--
as part of the source.
Soul, on the other
hand, is the record
of spirit pursuing
its own individuality
through different
realms of experience.
>>REGINA: That's a good
way to describe it.
>>CANOVA: And, of course, you
accumulate the Akashic record
and everything else.
That all has to do with
soul and soul-mind.
So soul and spirit are
really two different states.
The dimension that
Sophia created
would, of course,
involve ego, because she
was acting on her own for
herself for her own experience.
So ego was part
of that equation.
And opposition,
as you go lower--
into lower and lower
levels of creation,
can take on the appearance
of what we call evil.
The opposition in and of itself
in the abstract is not evil.
In fact, the devil in
early Judaic tradition
was not the horned being with
cloven hooves and everything
else.
He was called the
Angel of Opposition.
And he was sent by
the creator to create
obstacles for human
beings to overcome
so that they could grow.
But as you get further and
further into denser realms,
that force of opposition
can become extreme
and take on the attributes
of what we call evil.
So in other words, it
can be so individualistic
that you think of only
yourself and nobody else.
And you can hurt other people.
Psychopaths, Hitlers--
that's the extreme
that opposition can go to.
So there are shades
of opposition.
There are shades of shadow.
And there are shades of light.
It's not like an either/or.
There's a lot of
nuances in between.
But the dimension
that Sophia created
as a result of her action was
the dimension of soul-mind
or the dimension of psyche.
Now, here is where you start
to see light and shadow come
into play.
Because you still have the
impulses and the archetypes
from the spirit realm
that they came from.
But they were diluted.
They now became shadows so
that in the Gnostic texts,
and I think even in
the Casey tradition,
they posited on Earth.
But it wasn't the
Earth that we know.
It was like an etheric Earth.
It was a template of--
a blueprint of the Earth.
And that would have come
from the mind of the source.
Well, when in
Sophia's dimension,
they started the beings
there because they
were looking for
individual experience,
started messing with that.
And that's where
you start to get
degrees of light and shadow.
Because the archetypes would
have been the guiding images.
But now these souls
were off for themselves.
And they were developing
their own ways
to use their creative powers,
misusing their creative powers,
you could say, in some ways.
And ultimately, that misuse
of the creative power
led to the second fall of
soul into material experience,
into material bodies.
So you can see that
desire for experience
was progressing into
all forms, including,
finally, a spiritual
being in physical form,
which is what human beings are.
>>REGINA: So now we're
in more or less one
of the denser realms of
creation at this point.
And so the supposition is that
we have to, through experience,
through opposition, learn
our way back toward more
of the original template.
Can you explain in this body of
work what that would look like?
>>CANOVA: Yeah, that's
pretty much accurate,
what you just said.
This is a school.
We are spiritual beings
having a material experience.
And we're learning things.
We put ourselves in a box.
And now we have to learn to
get ourselves out of the box.
And the Gnostic
texts and many of
the ancient spiritual
traditions really
devoted themselves to teaching
their adepts different ways
and techniques of regaining that
higher source of consciousness.
And in all honesty, that's
what my book is about.
My book is a way, a roadmap
to try and help people
have those experiences with--
extraordinary experiences
with consciousness.
And I call it a map
because, like a map,
you have to have at least a
couple of coordinates, north
and south, latitude
and longitude.
Well, my coordinates are
quantum science on one hand
and ancient spiritual
wisdom on the other.
And they're both saying the same
thing in different languages
at different times.
But they're both indicating
the same matrix or function
of creation.
So once people understand
that-- and I think
it's inspirational to people.
Because you could go
to one of your average
consciousness-raising
seminar and listen
to your favorite
garden-variety guru.
And OK, you might take what
he says on faith because you
haven't experienced that.
But when you hear quantum
science saying the same thing,
it's aha, well, now I
see there's another side.
There may be something in this.
This is worth it
for me to pursue.
Maybe these truths
that I'm hearing about,
maybe there's a way
that I can find these
by having the understandings
of these dual understandings.
So that's what I'm trying
to do, is really inspire
people to their own path
to higher consciousness
through these two avenues
that create the arena for them
to operate in.
>>REGINA: So let's
go back to that then.
Let's talk about
the language that
would be used around this
part of the creation.
OK, now we have
this material world
that's showing up as polarized.
And now we're dropping
into material reality.
In quantum terms, you call it
disruption of the quantum foam,
leading to materiality.
>>CANOVA: Yeah, well,
think of it this way.
Remember, we started off by--
>>REGINA: Disruption
being the key word there.
>>CANOVA: Right.
Remember how we
started off talking
about the source creating
this infinite quantum field.
And you can think of
it as a smooth energy.
But it gets compartmentalized
at some points.
And the best way I can
liken it to you is this.
All right, I live in Florida.
And we have things called
waterspouts in Florida.
Waterspouts are essentially
waterborne tornadoes.
And they just develop.
I'm not even sure
why they happen.
But you can have a
smooth river flowing.
And all of a sudden,
you have this disruption
of this waterspout, which
is a little cyclone.
You don't want to be near them.
And they can do
some real damage.
But you look at that
waterspout, and you
look at that as something
different from the river,
the water that it came
from, but it's not.
The water is smooth.
But this is a disruption.
And the disruption
takes on the appearance
of something separate.
But it's really not.
So in this manner,
our reality is
like a blemish or a blip
in this quantum field.
It's like a compartment
And within that
compartment, we operate
under certain laws and
perceptions and beliefs
and things like that.
But we're really all
part of that stream--
that main stream.
We're just kind of
cul-de-sacked into believing
that we're something different.
>>REGINA: So let's talk--
let's go back to Sofia.
So this has all
occurred under her power
and her own creative abilities.
And there comes a
point where she's
beginning to have
second thoughts
and repent over her creations.
So let's talk about that as
through the lens of this work.
>>CANOVA: This is where it
can get a little bit trippy.
The shadow that we
spoke about takes
on a quasi-spiritual form.
It was a being that was called
Yaldabaoth or the Demiurge.
And it really represented
all the negative attributes
of soul-mind,
this-- the egotism,
the selfishness,
the feeling that I
am the center of the universe.
And nothing else
exists beyond me.
And that being,
essentially, really,
was the product of
all our thoughts.
That our negative thoughts
feed these beings.
Now, Carlos Castaneda
called them flyers.
The Gnostics called
them archons.
They were these strange beings.
And incidentally,
it's spilled over
into ufology with Grays
and things like that.
But they're all really
describing the same phenomenon,
which is a centralized
thought process that
contains the shadow, the
negative aspects of life
outside the source--
>>REGINA: Almost
like an entity that's
been created through perpetual,
repeated thought forms?
>>CANOVA: Well, that's exactly
where I was getting to.
And these entities are
created and perpetuated
and fed through the negative
emotions of human beings.
They feed on them.
And so Sophia saw
all this happening
and realized that,
OK, I've done this.
And she goes through a
series of repentance.
In the "Pistis Sophia," is
it-- there's, I don't know,
four, five, or six chapters
of her just repenting
and repenting.
And she is allowed to ascend
to a level where she--
it's not all the way back to
the source, where she came from.
But she is allowed to ascend
to a higher level, where
she essentially can work
as a guiding world spirit
in order to bring the lost
souls back to this way station.
I won't call it purgatory.
But I'll call it more like a
way station, where once the--
enough of the soul consciousness
of a particular sphere
has been enlightened,
that's the tipping point.
And then all of a sudden, some
wonderful speculative things
could happen.
That could be where kingdom--
the kingdom of heaven
comes down to Earth.
That could be where the
veil between the spiritual
and the physical
ceases to exist.
And we can do what
I think we were
able to do at one
time, which has come
in and out of
physical body, come
in and out of physical forms.
Casey said, and in one of my
books, I write about the fact
that there was an early
Atlantis-like civilization.
And when they first
came here, they
could come in and
out of physical form.
But eventually, they began to
identify with the boundaries
of their skin.
And they became
trapped in the idea
that they are these
physical beings.
>>REGINA: Yeah, the
culture's lowered
over a long period of time.
>>CANOVA: But I had the
perception from long ago
that we are the
fingers of God that
touch the face of this Earth.
And that our purpose is to
spiritualize the material
and bring the experience of
the material back to spirit
so that spirit can have
experience in all forms,
including being a physical form.
And this is the way the
source experiences--
We're the relays.
We're the conduits.
In this electrical grid,
the source is there.
We're the relay stations
that both contribute
to the creation of
reality, but feed back
the experience of
that to the source.
So we have a very-- unlike
Christianity and Judaism,
which has told us that
we're these lowly sinners.
And we ticked off God.
>>REGINA: Yeah, don't buy it.
>>CANOVA: And now we're
forever trying to get back
into his good graces.
It didn't work like that.
We are the very important bridge
between matter and spirit.
Yeah.
>>REGINA: Yes.
And this gets us
into a larger debate
and the word I was a little--
searching for a little bit
ago regarding these creations.
Because I've always
wondered-- it was egregore.
We create these
egregores, which are
these composite
entities of our thoughts
and feelings and emotions.
And we give them an identity.
And they're all around us.
We're creating
them all the time.
But at the same time, we can
be creating the opposite.
We can be creating a very
positive egregore of sorts
by the way of our own
understanding of life going--
returning to the Noble Truths.
And living in a sense
of compassion and grace,
we can create the
very thing you're
talking about-- the bridge
that goes back to that,
but through Sophia's efforts.
But one thing when you're
talking, I keep thinking Eve.
It's almost like
all the sin has been
hung on Sophia in this story.
She was the downfall.
And again, the feminine
being the downfall,
do you see it that way?
>>CANOVA: No.
In the Gnostic
texts, the serpent
was actually an agent of wisdom.
And Sophia-- or I should
say Eve at that point,
actually awoke from
the shadow state
that the-- as you call them,
the egregores or the archons
had created.
So essentially, she
was recovering wisdom.
And I will say this just
to go back because you
mentioned about the egregores.
And the Gospel of Philip, which
is one of my favorite Gnostic
Gospels, it said
God created men.
Now men create gods.
>>REGINA: That's very true.
>>CANOVA: And that's what
he really was speaking of,
the egregores or
the thought forms
that you're talking about.
So the feminine was exalted
at one point in history.
We had matriarchal and
even matrilineal societies.
Like Egypt before 3000
BC was both a matriarchal
and a matrilineal society.
It eventually shifted
and became patriarchal.
And I have my theories
about why that happened.
I think when spirit came down
into this world after a while,
it had to live in danger--
saber-toothed tigers,
things trying to kill it,
things happening, bad weather.
>>REGINA: When survival
became the imperative.
>>CANOVA: Survival
became imperative.
And the-- it was really more
of a left brain function
to deal with that, how
to organize yourself
against your environment.
And that's a patriarchal
male way of looking at it.
>>REGINA: Well,
and also the male
was more equipped to do that
just by size and strength
alone.
>>CANOVA: Yeah.
So there was a shift.
But what the feminine always
represented was the really--
in my opinion, the gateway
back to the spiritual world.
Because it involves feeling.
And it involves insight.
And it involves intuition.
And if you have those qualities,
you're on a spiritual path.
You're already connected
to the spirit--
to spiritual hub.
Now, that doesn't mean
that only women have that.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
>>CANOVA: Don't mistake that.
>>REGINA: It's feminine,
not necessarily women.
>>CANOVA: Jung called it
the anima and the animus,
the male and the female and
the female and the male.
And very much like
a saying of Jesus,
Jesus said when you
make the male female
and the female male, and
you make the two as one,
then you will realize
the kingdom of heaven.
Jung said the exact same thing.
That when you merge those,
you become an individuated,
actualized human being.
That you become
the essence of what
it means to be a human being.
You are in balance now.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>CANOVA: And so but the
feminine quality always played
a very important role in that.
And I liken it to a rocket ship.
Because there's two basic
systems in a rocket ship.
You have the fuel.
And you have the
guidance system.
So the fuel is the
feminine aspect of it.
That is the insight to uplift.
That there's something
else up there.
And I want to work
my way towards it.
But the guidance system is what
helps you shape your direction
once you've achieved liftoff.
One is not good
without the other.
Without the fuel, you
don't get off the ground.
Without the guidance system,
you just go around in circles.
So they both play a
very important part.
>>REGINA: Back to logos
and prima materia.
>>CANOVA: Yeah.
>>REGINA: They work together
to create whatever reality
is intended to be created.
>>CANOVA: They
must work together.
Because that's the way
the original polarity was.
>>REGINA: Exactly, and
still is, obviously,
throughout the universe and
throughout the dimensions.
>>CANOVA: Right.
>>REGINA: And so now we get
to the little debate about
but was this all by design?
Was it the intention
of the great source
and the great creator to only
have the thought forms that
are all essentially
of goodness, or was
it to expand beyond
that to give universes
of experienced
birth, which Sophia
was responsible for doing?
>>CANOVA: Yeah.
>>REGINA: It seems to me like
she's the one that created this
entire--
>>CANOVA: The Gnostics had a
bit of a dual view on that.
On one hand, they described
her as being imprudent, rash.
They even described
her as being a whore.
That she--
>>REGINA: Find
that in the Bible.
>>CANOVA: That she
adulterated her high energies
with these lower elements.
They didn't mean it
in a carnal sense,
but in a spiritual sense.
So that she was a prostitute
in a spiritual sense.
>>REGINA: So that was
one school of thought.
>>CANOVA: But another school
of thought was that no,
this was all known
from the beginning.
Now, I tend to go with
that latter belief
because I believe you
have, essentially,
an all-knowing source.
And I have to believe
that although I
do believe that there's degrees
of freedom and latitude allowed
within that scheme of
things, I do believe
it's working towards an--
a guided ending.
And so in that
regard, yeah, I think
it was foreseen that
this would happen.
>>REGINA: I agree with you.
I think that is how
it was to have been.
And hence, we're here.
We're embodied.
And we're able to talk about it.
So going back to the
purpose of your work, which
is, as we spoke
about before, we're
creating gods every minute
by our own thought--
collective thought.
So now to create that critical
mass of that positive noble
thought again to take
this species of humanity
back more toward our rightful
place and our rightful state
of being, what do you think
is most required of each of us
now?
>>CANOVA: Well,
obviously, you have
to have some spiritual
attributes in your life.
You have to have some vision
of spirit in your life.
And I think what's required
is you have to work
towards it a little bit.
It's like anything else.
It doesn't just
drop in your lap.
Now, OK, for some
people, like myself,
things happen to me
that I didn't seek,
that just were there.
OK, that happens to some people.
Other people, they have to work
more towards that revelation
or peeling those layers
away for things to happen.
But we're all capable
of that happening.
I think the thing to
really understand is this--
I'm not a big believer in
a lot of New Age adages.
But the whole thing
about being co-creators
is really true from
a quantum standpoint,
as well as from a
spiritual standpoint.
I likened it to, like
I said, the source--
let's say the source is the
raw power of a power grid
like we have power grids
that run this country.
The source is the raw power.
Well, raw power is never
transmitted for use.
It has to be stepped down.
So it's stepped down into
the-- into relay stations.
And we're the relay
stations in effect.
So we are part of
that energy, even
though in a limited and stepped
down sense-- stepped down
frequency.
But we can increase
our frequencies.
We can increase our
rate of vibration
by the level of understanding
and experience we have.
And it's not just enough
to have understanding.
Because there is a
difference between knowledge
gained by books and knowledge
gained by experience.
Knowledge gain by experience
is the higher form.
Because I could tell you, for
instance, that fire burns.
But you don't know
that for sure until you
stick your hand in the fire.
Then you own it.
You know what fire's about.
That's knowledge by experience.
So the point that I'm trying
to tell people is-- in fact,
I often start off my public
speaking by saying to people,
don't believe a damn thing
I'm going to tell you.
And they sit there scratching
their heads saying, well, what
do we pay to come to this for?
I'm saying I'm not telling you
not to pay attention to me.
And I'm not telling you not
to take in and internalize
the information I'm giving you.
What I'm saying is you
don't have to believe me.
What you have to do
is get to the point
where you have your own
experiences and revelations
with this source
that's out there.
And then you become
your own prophet.
You don't need somebody
like me to listen to.
You don't need to look up
to me or any other teacher
or guru or anything else.
You can own this
in your own self.
And all I'm doing is trying to
give the people a roadmap to,
maybe, maximize
the ability to have
those kinds of experiences.
>>REGINA: To go into
connection with source.
To go into connection with
your own soul and/or mind.
>>CANOVA: What I found
is source is like a radio
station broadcasting 24/7.
And until I had certain
revelations or awakenings,
I was like somebody
trying to tune that radio.
All I was getting was static.
But then I finally hit
on that one frequency.
And it became clear to me
that it was like a 24/7
broadcast of information.
And it was information that
could really enhance one's life
and help you really get a
grasp on what reality was about
and realize that this is
just the bottom ladder
of multiple dimensions
that are above us
and that we can get information
from those dimensions
that we can come and
bring back and use here,
which was the
basis of shamanism.
Shamans were those
people that walked
on the other side, brought
back information for healing,
for guiding their tribes,
and so forth and so on.
>>REGINA: Agreed.
It's a time to be
our own shaman.
We can go to the higher mind,
which is connected to the all.
>>CANOVA: Exactly.
>>REGINA: And so just
finding that, like you say,
hitting on that
frequency so that you
can hear that voice
because it's so clear, so
clean, and, usually,
quite logical too.
And it's not laden
with all the emotions
that we have in this realm.
Might it be fair
also to say in terms
of the collective of the human
soup that we're creating,
just to let go of cynicism in
favor of actual discernment?
Cynicism is really born out
of fear of others' projections
on us.
To let go of cynicism
and maybe start
seeing the good in each
other a little bit more,
might that help the
soup start, essentially,
simmering a bit faster--
simmer a bit faster?
>>CANOVA: I think fear
is probably the greatest
impediment--
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
>>CANOVA: --to human existence.
And that's why I
wrote this book.
Because I believe the
degree to which you
increase your consciousness,
you reduce your fear.
Because you have a
better understanding
of how things work.
And things start to
make more sense to you.
You no longer start to feel
like a random leaf being
blown around in the wind.
You start to understand the
nature of the wind itself.
>>REGINA: Yeah, I agree.
I couldn't agree more.
I think you're right on it.
And, as we said early
in the beginning
or I said, anyway, to
me, Sophia's God's girl.
She got the whole
game in motion.
So we get to
experience all of this.
>>CANOVA: Yeah.
We can thank Sophia.
You either thank
Sophia or curse her.
I guess--
>>REGINA: I thank her.
>>CANOVA: --they did both.
But like I say,
I mean, I believe
there's a purpose to humanity.
I believe we serve a purpose,
which I described earlier.
And we ought to start
thinking of ourselves
as living a little bit more of
an exalted state of existence--
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
>>CANOVA: --rather than these--
>>REGINA: Poor sinners--
>>CANOVA: --lowly sinners that--
>>REGINA: --begging
for forgiveness.
>>CANOVA: Yeah.
>>REGINA: Because we exist.
I mean, our biggest sin
was, what, being born--
>>REGINA: Born.
>>CANOVA: --being born.
How do you get beyond that?
>>REGINA: You and I are
on the same page, Peter.
And thank you so much.
You're really fun to talk
to about all of this.
Because a lot of
times, especially when
you get into the quantum
realm, it can be quite heavy.
And you keep it
fun and accessible.
So thank you so much
for joining me today.
>>CANOVA: Thanks for having me.
>>REGINA: Again, the book is
titled "Quantum Spirituality."
And you can go down all
those rabbit holes yourself
and connect with
your higher self.
To learn more about Peter,
you can go to petercanova.com.
Until next time, thank
you for joining us here
on "Open Minds."
[THEME MUSIC]